Welcome back to the Data Science Hangout, everyone. If you're joining for the first
time, it's great to meet you. I'm Rachel, I'm the host of the Data Science Hangout.
As I mentioned at the meetup yesterday, if you were there, I do want to take a moment
to say it's nice to be able to share some space with everyone right now. What we do
at rstudio is only made possible because of the community. And we're all beneficiaries
of so many amazing community members, many of whom are affected by the war in Ukraine
right now. So we also want to use this opportunity to support them back in any way that we can.
And so Sep and Birla, who you may know from the Data Science Hangout, had shared a few
ways on LinkedIn, which we can all help that I'll share in the chat. But if you do have
other information to share, please feel free to do so in the chat as well. Thank you, everyone.
And for anybody joining for the first time, the Data Science Hangout is an open space
for the whole data science community to connect and chat about data science leadership, questions
you're facing and what's really going on in the world of data science. We really want
this to be a space where everybody can participate. And we can hear from everyone. So there's
three ways to ask questions. You can always jump in live and maybe raise your hand on
Zoom might be the best way to do that. You can put questions in the Zoom chat and just
put a little star next to it if you want me to read it or else I can just call on you
to bring into the conversation too. And then lastly, we do also have a Slido link where
you can ask questions anonymously too. And Rob will share that in the chat in just a
moment. Just like to reiterate, we love to hear from everyone, no matter your level of
experience or area of work too. But for today, I'm so happy to be joined by my co-host, Stephen
Bailey. Stephen's a data engineer at Whatnot. And Stephen, I'd love to turn it over to you
to introduce yourself and maybe share a bit about the work that you do.
Yeah, absolutely. Thanks, Rachel. Hey, everybody. It's really my pleasure to be here today.
I'll give you a little bit of my story over the last five years or so and where I'm at now.
My data journey started as a PhD student doing biomedical image analysis at Vanderbilt
University. My PhD was on this cool mix of MRI images of the brain and cognitive development
and children, like educational pedagogy with reading. And so essentially what we did was
we brought kids in every summer and took brain scans of them and then looked at how their brains
changed and interactions between brain areas changed as they learned to read and become
fluent in decoding and reading comprehension. It's really fun. We got to do a lot of data
engineering and processing and basically learn everything from the ground up. Statistics,
the whole data science workflow. Towards the end of that program, I decided I wanted to go
more into industry rather than sticking with academia because I just love the process so much.
By the time a project got to the poster session and I was explaining things, I was already tinkering
on the next thing. Industry was a great fit. I started at a company called Immuta, which is a
data catalog company that's very focused on compliance-related functionality. For example,
if you load data into your data warehouse and it has PII on it, a lot of times you want to protect
that data or apply permissions and policies on it so that only certain people can see it.
Immuta automated that. I got to build out the data team there. I got to learn a lot about
data management, a lot about metadata management. Just recently this year, I went from a director
position there managing a team of about four or five people to an individual contributor position
at a company called Whatnot, which is kind of like QVC meets eBay. People can hop on the app
and sell stuff, especially collectibles like trading cards, sports cards, vinyl records,
vintage clothing. They can build a following. It's a very interesting mix of social networking,
real-time auctions, live stream data. I'm running the data platform there, or at least
managing the engineering aspect of it. It's been very much a drinking by the fire hose experience,
but it's been really awesome to start learning. Awesome. Thanks, Stephen.
I know on these chats a lot, we talk about what it's like to move into leadership or move into
the first management of data science role, but what has it been like to go
kind of the other way back to being an individual contributor? Yeah, that's a great question. I think
I don't know what the real percentage of data professionals who go
into management and then come back into individual contributors is. I don't know what
that looks like, but I know anecdotally a lot of people do make that switch because,
I think for two reasons. One is a lot of us get into data and kind of like very organically move
into positions of influence within the organization simply because we love answering questions and we
love like getting close to the business problem and like trying to use data to improve it.
It kind of naturally, I know for me at Immuta, I kind of naturally moved into a position where
we were growing. We needed more people to focus on it and I was like situated to lead that team.
It wasn't like a, I want to go and be a manager type of experience. It was very organic.
As I spent more time in that role, I learned a ton, but I also like missed the data side
because being like an individual contributor right now is just so fun. I mean, you just get
to play with so many cool tools, the sort of the opportunities and possibilities of building
different data products is endless. It's getting easier every month. And so that's really what I,
you know, that's what motivated me to move back into the data engineering role is just that
opportunity to like build bigger, cooler, more interesting systems that I hadn't done before.
Cool. To put us all maybe in like the mindset of the work that you do at Whatnot, I'm curious,
what are some of the like business problems that you're helping solve?
Yeah. So that's a great question. I think Whatnot is really exciting because it's a,
it's a peer to peer marketplace. It's kind of like, you know, an Uber where you've got a driver
and you've got a passenger and the app is really like facilitating a transaction between them.
So the same is true for us where you've got a seller with Pokemon cards, you've got a buyer
who wants to buy Pokemon cards and we have to put them together at the same time, like in real time
so that they can have a transaction take place. So what is really exciting at Whatnot is the focus
on real time analytics and real time data. I'm very much a person who's, I come from a world
where it's like big batches, big batch processing, like with medical imaging. And then
even with like a lot of business data, it's not, it doesn't need to be that fast because, you know,
as long as the report's there in the morning, like everyone can kind of do their jobs. But at Whatnot,
because the, because things move so fast, the ability to implement real time systems is actually
very important because if someone's in an auction and selling something that's valued at $5,000,
you know, a lot of people want to go see that. And the auction is going to be over in 30 seconds
to 60 seconds, because it's literally like, you know, here's this designer, the iPhone that Steve
Jobs, you know, owned and, you know, and then it's like starting at $1 and it's boom, boom, boom, boom,
up to, you know, $5,000 or whatever. So the speed at which things are moving is really interesting,
really like a challenging technical problem to answer, but there's so much opportunity for
building interesting, like insights off of it and systems. That's awesome. I see,
you just wrote in on the chat. Do you want to jump in and ask that question?
Yeah, sure. Thanks for taking the time to answer everybody's questions and share your story.
You mentioned cool tools that you that you're playing with. I want to
see if there were some on top of your mind. Yeah.
So, you know, kind of in the same vein of the real time analytics conversation, there's,
there's kind of a whole host of new databases that are becoming more popular that allow you to
build, build like streaming pipelines much easier than you normally would. So I don't,
this whole space is fairly new to me, but I think in the past, if you wanted to like
stream data from an application and then consume it by it for an analytics application,
you would have to set up like a Kafka, a whole Kafka event bus. And you'd have to have like an
like a sort of a streaming, a very like tuned streaming system. So there's like Kafka SQL
analytics and other things like that. But now tools like Rockset and materialize and time,
I think timescale DB are, are trying to make it much easier to just write SQL on top of these
systems. And so as long, once you set up the pipe from your event source whether that's clickstream
data or whatever, you can just write SQL queries on it and then expose those to, to applications.
And, you know, basically you have a very, a much lighter weight way to,
to make recommend, like to implement like recommendation systems or ranking systems,
or even like payment processes, like payment analysis systems. So fraud detection is like
a big question that we're big issue that we're trying to focus on. And I think data, like the
data team has a big opportunity to help like influence, make that easier. So definitely those
real time, the real time stuff is important is, is really cool. The other tool that I just love
working with is DBT, which is like a data management tool. And they have some new functionality
out around what's called a metrics layer, which is basically a way to simplify the creation of like
metrics and kind of govern metrics kind of within the database logic.
Oh, thanks, Steven. Robert, I see you just asked a question in the chat too, if you want to jump in.
Yeah. Hey there. Thanks for doing this. Yeah, I work at, I work at our studio. So I was, I was
curious if you could clarify what the difference between a data engineer and a data scientist in
your eyes, because I see that you're currently a, your title is data engineer, but you're not
your title is data engineer, but previously it was a data and analytics.
Yeah. Yeah. I, I feel like I've kind of been all over the map from a title perspective. I think
my training in the PhD program was very much like you kind of get trained to be an independent
investigator. And that, that means like you're designing the experiment, you're collecting the
data, you're processing the data, you're storing it somewhere for reuse, you're analyzing it,
you're creating the images, and then you're also like presenting it. So you get this full
life cycle. And I think the same is fairly true of the business, except there's, there's this
like fulcrum in the middle around the database. And so like where the data is stored. And so I
would say the, the data engineering side of things, I think of more as designing data models,
making like cold, like ingesting data from different sources across the company,
making sure that those pipelines are running efficiently and reliably and really building
trust in the raw data or like the, and the slightly like lightly processed data.
Whereas the data scientist, I think of as much more
like pointed towards a problem area. So the engineer, I think of as systems, a systems
thinker, where it's like, we're bringing in data, we want to make it reusable for a large number of
applications. Whereas a data scientist is very much like, I need to solve a problem, I need to
create a, you know, an app, a specific application that's going to like, or a specific model that's
going to be deployed to make decisions. So I think of it a little bit in those terms. So systems
thinking and, and like data ingestion, collection, reliability, versus, you know, solving a business
problem, building something that's generalizable, you know, building a model that's generalizable
for a solution, that type of thinking.
Two just sort of quick follow-ups to that. Are there, is there a lot of overlap in tools
for data engineering versus science? And then is there a, is there a clear path sort of into
leadership or higher level roles for data engineering today? It's a, I guess a newish,
newish field or title. Yeah, that's a good question.
With my data engine, like, with my data engineering hat, I, I see a much clearer
like relationship or I feel much more like closer kinship with the infrastructure and DevOps and
software engineering teams at whatnot. So, you know, I'm working in, I'm building stuff out in
AWS, I'm setting up like monitoring and logging and I'm managing some network, you know, networking
type of stuff. And that has a lot of overlap with stuff that site reliability engineers and other
infrastructure minded people are focused on. And so I do see a, like a career ladder that,
that looks similar to a, like an engineering career ladder. I think, and that might,
I mean, it depends on the, I guess it really depends on the industry from a data science
perspective, but I do think there's, if you have like a data science organization, like there's a
clear career ladder in that. But like at Immuta, I don't think there was a very clear career ladder
for the data science people. Like I think the data engineering side could, could kind of go up that
infrastructure ladder, but then the data science, it was almost like you had to go into the business
to grow. I don't know. Does that answer your question? It does. Yeah. Thank you.
I feel like we're all learning, learning as we go with, with what the career trajectory looks like.
Definitely. Meredith, I see you have your hand raised if you want to jump in.
Thanks. Yeah. Thanks Steven for your presentation and answering our questions. I love how you
frame data engineering versus data science, not so much by the task, but by the big picture of,
you know, the kind of thinking that, that one does when they're in one position or another.
I've heard a number of people talk about being really excited about dbt and liking working with
it. Can you recommend, so I've got two questions. The first one is what do you recommend for how to
learn dbt or get more exposure to it? And then the second one is that, so I'm, I'm a career changer
and I am really interested in data analytics because it relates to health. And so to watch
your career trajectory of starting out working with biomedical imaging and then shifting out
into other things, I'm really curious for you what had meaning for you as it relates to that work
and did it lose its meaning or like kind of how your, how meaning has been part of your career,
career trajectory? Oh man, that's a great question. Okay. Let me start with the first part,
which is about dbt. So what I found, you know, so my background was a scientist, right? Like
experiment. And I'm taking that experiment to the end, to the conclusion, like what did we learn
from this? And it's like very project based. When I moved to Immuta, I started off and I was a data
scientist and I like had those projects. It's like, all right, how's our product perform under
these circumstances, run an experiment, present the results like that. When I started building
out the internal team and the data platform, it's a very different kind of task because you're
building out an organization, an organizational capability, which is the data platform. So it's
not a project. It becomes a system that you're building. And I was not equipped at all to answer,
like to understand how to build a system that's going to be very reusable for the company over
time. Because if you build it wrong, that means in a year or two years, you're going to have to go
through and like refactor all this stuff. And so you really want to build it right at the beginning.
What dbt does is the whole, the whole shtick is basically like decoupling the, in the pulling in
of data with the using of data. So dbt basically says, all right, you've got data in your database.
You want to do like, you want to build a dashboard over here, put all of the logic in SQL and put it
in your database. And it, it basically allows you to, it makes it very easy to do that. And
it's got some, like the, the way it does it, it's like very heavily, nicely managed for you. It
makes it very easy for even someone who's very new to like database management to, to do it the
right way, right off the bat. And, and so it made me much more. So first of all, it let me build a
system that was not terrible, right away. And then secondly, it helped me to, and the team,
improve the system and build conventions over time. And because it's all in version control,
it's in GitHub, it, as we added more people to the team, they could go back and look at like,
what's happening. They could submit pull requests and we could have conversations over new data
models that are coming in and things like that. So it kind of, you get the first win out of just
like, it helps you do things the right way early on. And the second win is it creates a channel
for communication and collaboration. That is really hard to, to create if you're not using
something like GitHub. So that's why I'm a huge dbt fan. But your second question about the,
like kind of the domain question and healthcare and all that stuff is, is also great.
For me, I'm a huge, like, for me, I get a lot of reward out of doing things that make, like,
that I can see an impact on the way people work or like, like the personal sort of like,
of collaborating with people. And so the types of things that I really enjoyed at Immuta were
when I could sit down with a business stakeholder and like, say like, hey, like, what's your problem
and really understand, like, the sorts of tedious tasks that they're doing that we could automate.
I could build, like, oftentimes it's pretty easy for a data person to build something that's going
to, you know, automatically pull those numbers and sort them in the right way that's going to
help them help a business user do actions better. And so I found a lot of value out of that
in my career in industry. At Whatnot, I'm kind of doing similar things where I can build pipes
and build systems that make it easier for us to understand our customers or, you know, build
workflows that are more efficient. But I do miss, I do miss the domain, like, the healthcare domain,
the image processing stuff, thinking about the sort of bigger picture of science and general,
generalization. I think it's offset a little bit though, because the data world is so deep
and the technology is always changing. There's a lot of, you know, conversations around what's
the best way to do this or, like, what's the best way to organize the teams and all of this stuff.
So I find that even though I miss some of the healthcare type of learning and thinking very
deeply about specific problems, there's more than enough exciting stuff for me to learn and
dig into that that keeps me satisfied. Thanks, Steven. Ethan, I see you had also asked a question
earlier in the chat, too, and love to have you ask that one live.
Or I can, I can read it, too. And you can jump in and add more context if you want.
But the question was, is there anywhere you see the application of zero-knowledge proofs
that help make working with PPI and ensure compliance easier?
And I'll admit, I do not know what that means. So feel free to jump in with more context, too, Ethan.
Sorry, yeah. So zero-knowledge proof is basically a concept around cybersecurity where you can
validate stuff without actually knowing the actual answers. So I was just wondering if
there's any applications around personal data that help making working with easier, because, you know,
I'm in Europe and GDPR is quite a big thing over here. And, you know, there's a lot of concerns
around privacy. Yeah. Are zero-knowledge proofs, is that like the same as homomorphic encryption,
or is it like a concept around homomorphic encryption? Yeah, it's different. It's a
concept around how do we, so basically, you can prove to the other person that you know something
without the other person actually knowing it. So, for example, if you have a key, you can prove to
the other person, I have this key, but the other person wouldn't know what the keys look like.
Yeah, gotcha, gotcha. Yeah, so during, I can't speak too knowledgeably about this specific
question. I do have some experience with like implementing privacy, privacy
enhancing technologies in organizations. So at Immuta, we, the product would scan a data warehouse
for sensitive data and tag it. So like it would say, all right, this looks like you have social
security numbers, it looks like you have addresses, it looks like you have names and things like that.
And then there were a couple of approaches that we could automatically implement if you had a policy
that wanted to mitigate privacy concerns. The ones that we had were masking technology, masking
methods, like hashing, redaction, replacement with string, rounding, etc. We had one that was
called k-anonymization and we had one that was called differential privacy. So I think there's
a whole other set of methods like zero-knowledge proofs, homomorphic encryption. It's another one
I can't remember, but basically there's a number of technologies that you can implement.
What I'll say is that it's for a lot of organizations, just implementing like the
basics is very, very, the basics at scale is very, very challenging because you have to have a lot of
metadata, essentially, a lot of high-quality metadata to do privacy
management very, very well. So you have to know, you have to have a language around what
is sensitive data, you have to have metadata on the data itself that says this column is
sensitive. You have to have policies in place in your organization. So you have to know,
like actually, you actually have to have someone who's translating that into an actionable policy
of like, we need to mask this type of data for these types of users. You have to have high-quality
user data to know like who is accessible. And in Europe, you also have to have like this concept
of projects and purposes around like what is, for this person using this data under these
parameters, like why are they using it? And you have to manage all of that in one place.
So it's extremely challenging to get all those things right. I think what we found,
like what we spent a lot of our time doing at Immuta was trying to help organizations build
a language that would allow them to address those sorts of questions at scale, because I
think that's really the problem. So all of that to say, I think what we found oftentimes was that
people would come in and they'd say like, we want to do differential privacy, which is essentially
like randomizing, injecting randomization into your data set to provide a level of privacy
guarantees. But then they'd always end up going down to like, let's just mask the data,
like let's just mask the data and like get it, like get started using it rather than like trying
to do the most private thing first off. I think individual research teams, however, individual
teams that have like a very specific project they're trying to do, they can have a lot more
success with things like differential privacy, homomorphic encryption, and that type of stuff.
So there's probably a lot of value for certain use cases that are very well-defined,
you know. So that's kind of my, I don't know, my big picture thought on that.
Yeah, I think that's definitely one of the masking, definitely one of the future
of data as, you know, previously become more of an issue, because client wouldn't even let us
touch the data because it's too sensitive. And, you know, in Europe, you have to jump to sort of
hoops to be able to work with personal data. Yeah, yeah. And it can be hard, like something
like that can be very useful, you know, especially for like, there's different phases of
analytics, right? So there's like just knowing that someone else's data could be useful to you,
like that's where you want to have something like that zero-knowledge group where it's like, hey,
can we even start on this question? Because you might not have the data that you need
to actually do anything meaningful with. And if you can't see it at all, you can't know
whether it's worth pursuing. Arifat, I see you had clapped and then raised your hand.
So I'm guessing you have something to add to this topic too. Yeah, hi, can you hear me? Yes.
Okay. Hi, Stephen. Thanks. I've been loving this conversation and everything. The clap was about
the conversation, but that was a mistake. But I really appreciate the discussion.
I actually wanted to ask you about your transition from being a data scientist to
data engineer. So how is the transition itself? And what would be some of the things that you think
that really helped you in your current job from your data science experience? And what are the
weaknesses or things that you had to learn immediately? The reason that I'm asking,
because a lot of times I get recruiters contacting me for data engineering kind of roles, but I'm
currently in data science area. So I'm trying to understand why and also why not kind of.
Yeah. So I think,
so for me, I love the systems building part of data engineering. So I love being able to think
big picture about what are the patterns that we're implementing in these systems and how do
we make them very high quality and efficient, like implement checks. And that was true even
when I was doing my PhD, I often found myself gravitating towards the methods and rerunning
pipelines and trying to make pipelines more efficient, even when that probably wasn't the
most, the best thing for me to be doing. I probably could have benefited from doing more analysis or
doing more research. So I've always had sort of a system bent to me. And I would say that
the challenge that becoming more of a data engineering role, like moving more into the
data engineering role has presented is you have to know a lot about like the technologies and you
have to learn a lot of software engineering patterns that I was never taught. And so,
you know, things like domain driven design and like testing, like how do you design a Python
package? How do you implement good testing? How do you implement observability and like
log tracing across multiple systems, networking concerns, networking still, like I learn it and
then like I wake up the next morning and I have forgotten all of it. But there's a lot of,
there's a lot of technology, like I would say the technology side of things is much more
important in the data engineering world than it is on the data science side.
I think I've, I think one thing that I bring to a data engineering role that I wouldn't have if I
hadn't spent time as a data scientist is understanding use cases for data. A lot of
data engineers will kind of, I guess I don't want to put this on a lot of data engineers, but like
my impression is that if you are coming in just as a data engineer, you could silo yourself kind
of like in the backend and just be like laying down pipes and moving data from one place to
another and kind of get stuck in that role. But a good data engineer, I think has a lot of leverage
over helping the organization, like get data, not just to places on the right time, but in the right
way with the right metadata that makes it useful, like do some pre-processing of data to make it
really easy for data scientists to work on it. And so I think I bring a lot of that like context,
like contextual information about how data is going to be used, which makes me better at building
the systems for the users. I love, I mean if you think you like it, it's, I mean I think all of
data is a great place to be right now, but data engineering in particular is a spectacular place
to be because it's very, it's evolving constantly, you can have a lot of impact in your organization,
and there's just a ton of stuff to learn, a ton of very, very interesting, exciting stuff to learn.
Great, thanks. I see that kind of touched on your question as well,
Naveed, but just wanted to see if you have any follow-up there too.
Yeah, let me just unmute myself and show my, show my face. So I work at Kaiser Permanente and lead
the causal inference function at KP, and so I was just curious, I mean as you know, DS is pretty
wide, I mean you can get into a lot of different areas in DS. What part of DS did you end up leaving
to get into data engineering? I wonder if it was conditional to that as well.
Yeah, so my PhD was in, a lot of the engineering, a lot of the data science work was computer vision
related, so you know, we would get these four-dimensional brain images where you've got
like the brain, you know, a three-dimensional brain block, and then it's like it's changing
over time, and you have to register and normalize all this stuff, and then run stats across,
both within the time series of the brain and then across subjects, and so it was a lot of
subjects, and so it was computer vision, plus like stats, like population stats,
ANOVAs and stuff like that. When I went to Immuta, the data science was, it was really more data
analytics than data science, because we didn't have any, any sort of cutting-edge use cases for
things. It was more like, hey, we need to, we need to model the business and have very reliable,
trustworthy metrics around user behavior and sales performance and all these different things,
so I kind of went from what I would really call data science, or even just science,
to just data analytics, now to more of a dedicated data engineering role.
Yeah, thanks. Thank you. I see there was an anonymous question asked earlier on Slido
that was, if you had to choose, would you prefer being the first data science,
data scientist at a company, or being part of an existing group
of data scientists, and would the path to becoming a manager be different?
That's a great question. I think there's pros and cons, and you do have to ask yourself,
like, I think a lot of self-knowledge comes into play here. For me, I like,
like, I get super excited by learning new things and being able to build things. I am, like, you know,
98% of my excitement goes into the first, like, 80% of the project, and then I have 2% left for
the last 20%. I'm, like, that kind of worker, which is not necessarily, which is not the best
kind of worker in a lot of contexts, but it's great for startups, because everything you do
is new, like, so if you want to stand up a database, no one is going to stand up a database
for you. You have to learn, like, go into Amazon and, like, pick your database and decide how you,
how many nodes you want and, like, set up the networking and the security groups and stuff
like that. So what's great about being the first data scientist at a company is you get to write
the, you get to build the system, you get to understand, you get to chart the territory.
You're, like, kind of, like, you know, you're the pioneer charting the uncharted territory.
So that's very, that can be very exciting for people. It can also be very overwhelming
and lonely, because you don't know if your decisions are going to be right. You don't know
if, like, you're going to have to rebuild the system in the future. You don't, you might not
even know what you're doing, really. And when you, if you start learning, like, AWS and stuff,
like, you probably definitely won't know what you're doing for a while. So I loved that.
When I left Immuta, I knew for sure that I wanted to join an existing data team,
because I wanted to learn from others. I think that's the, that's one of the differences,
is if you're doing it, if you're charting your own course, there are great communities out there,
there's great learning materials out there, but you're still going to be ultimately alone
to some extent. I mean, you'll have business partners and stuff. But I knew I wanted to join
an existing team, because I wanted to learn from other people. I wanted to see what other people
were doing, how they were doing it, what kind of dashboards were they building, what kind of
conversations were they having, what, like, opportunities they see. And it's been very,
very rewarding to be in that sort of position for this at Whatnot. So it's a, it's just,
like anything, it's just got trade-offs. I would say, if you want to be the first data hire
at a startup, go for it, but just make sure you know kind of what you're getting into,
and are prepared for that.
Thanks, Steven. That's great advice. I see Sloane, you had asked a question earlier
about working with real-time data. Do you want to ask that one, Liv?
Hi, sure. Let me also turn my camera on. So you mentioned earlier that you went through,
when you started at Whatnot, working with real-time data in comparison to batch data in
the past, and I'm curious what unique and specific challenges that you ran into when
navigating that switch. Yeah, so, I mean, this is very much an active area of work for our company,
but it's a, what I would say is that the technical side of things matters a lot more.
With batch data, you can kind of, you know, just shove stuff into an S3 bucket, or like,
you know, not think too much about schedules, or efficiency of processing, and things like that.
If you're trying to deliver real-time analytics to an application, like a mobile application,
there's almost no room for error. Like, you have to be thinking, because you're trying to do it,
whatever your SLA is, it might be five seconds, right? So you think, like,
after you click a button, you know, that event has to go somewhere, and then it has to have
logic applied to it. Maybe it has to be joined with other data, or a model has to run on it,
and then it has to be sent back to your mobile device. And if anything takes, if it takes 20
seconds, like, as a mobile user, that's an eternity. So the stakes are just so much higher,
because you are trying to do something much more, you know, that affects the user much,
much more closely, and it's much more interactive. So that's one of the biggest shifts,
I think, just from a sort of emotional, like, almost like an emotional standpoint of,
like, people are going to be using this, this is going to affect the user experience. If this
thing doesn't work, then, like, maybe a show doesn't show up on someone's feed. And that
means that seller doesn't get featured as much, which changes, like, the seller's perception of
their experience on the app. So it's that sort of prominence of the system that I think is really
interesting.
I see Ian had asked earlier, what's your opinion of R as a data engineering
tool versus other languages like Python or C, for example?
I'm not a, I'm not an expert in R. I used it during my PhD, a number of, like, for a number of
use cases. I love R Shiny. R is, like, so much more elegant for a lot of data science work than
anything in Python. I think that's my, after using, after, but I made a deliberate switch
to learn Python for two reasons. One was because a lot of my work was using image processing
libraries that required me to do script, like, use things like OpenCV or, what's the Python,
SciPy. There were just more libraries out there for image processing work.
So I focused a lot on Python there. As I've, and I've, my sense is that there are more out
of the box solutions for Python. Like, it's much more of a lingua franca in the data engineering
world than R is. Just for, like, thinking about, like, what AWS provides, like, AWS provides a
CLI for, or not a CLI, but a library for Python users to interact with resources in AWS. Maybe
there's something like a Boto3 for R, I'm not sure. But I would say that
outside of, if, like, to the extent that you have to do things outside of a, like, data management
and processing flow, like, like, pull, like, ingest data, move data from a source system into
a database, but not, like, doing the processing on the fly, my guess is that Python has a little bit
more, more libraries out there. But I don't know. I guess that, I haven't, I never evaluated R
directly for data engineering use cases. So I'd be curious, I don't know if anyone else has thoughts
on that. That'd be a good one if anyone has any. Yeah, I see a few people sharing comments in the
chat, too, or libraries that don't exist, or libraries that do exist to help interact. So
feel free to jump in. I, a few years ago, we had, like, this, I mean, to speak about startups and
the wonderful world that they are, you know, sometimes things are like deadline, right? And
it's like, okay, we need this two weeks. I certainly enjoy that. I think I'm also come from
a science background. So I don't mind kind of, you know, going into the unknown and kind of just
iterating and learning as I go. And I think it's a wonderful learning opportunity for those that
are interested. But yeah, there was a project that required, like, a two-week turnaround.
And first several days, I was looking to grab data using R and then interacting with AWS.
And there was, like, one package, but it hadn't been updated in, like, several years. And it just
did not work whatsoever. And so I had to basically then revert into using Boto3,
but using Reticulate. So that way I can kind of coalesce the analytical stuff that was happening
with kind of extracting and using Python, Win for Reticulate. Obviously, you could do that in
just Python and kind of connect it that way too. But I haven't heard of PaaS, so maybe Ie-Ying
would speak about that. Yeah. Hi, everyone. So PaaS is more of, like, an SDK than, like, a really
easy-to-use functional R library. But I have had a lot of success with interacting with S3.
DynamoDB in particular is very easy to use through that package. And I'm on the GitHub repo right now,
and it looks like it was updated 12 days ago. So I think there is an active maintainer.
That's too long ago, Ie-Ying. Feel free to put that link in the chat too, Ie-Ying.
Let me see what other questions we have here. I see, Yousef, you had asked a question
in the chat. Do you want to jump in? I can read, and you can add more context too if you want to.
Yes, I just have a question. What was the most part of, the most
consuming part of your job as a data engineer? And what is the best tools,
open source tools for you as a data engineer? Yeah, so one of the, I think one of the fundamental
things that most data engineers are responsible for at some point is, like, the
ingestion pipelines that, you know, either ETL or ELT is kind of a new
pattern of just, like, extract and loads or replicate the data into your warehouse and
then do the transformation in the warehouse or in the data lake. So you spend a lot of time,
like, building, setting that up. But there are some good tools out there now, I'd say in the
last five years, tools like Fivetran, Stitch, Meltano, Airbyte is another one now, that have
essentially made it a commodity, like data replication a commodity, where if you are using
a standard customer, what do they call them, CRM, customer relationship management system,
usually there's a connector that's out there that you can just kind of plug and play and
extract data into your warehouse and, like, Fivetran has hundreds of connectors. And so
those sorts of frameworks and tools make the data engineer's job a lot easier from an
engineering, like, from a movement perspective. But I'd say there's still a considerable
amount of time being spent there, because you can always continue to optimize it too. So one
of the things we're talking about now, even outside of the real-time system and whatnot, is
how do we get more, how do we get data in quicker? How do we do more, like, get our batch processing
down from a 24-hour batch process down to a three-hour batch process or a two-hour thing?
And so that sort of optimization of the system is something where I'm constantly thinking about,
as well as data reliability and testing and making sure, like, building guarantees around
some of those core data assets that we have. I spend a lot of time thinking about that.
But one of the areas that I think is newer, I think something that is emerging in the data
engineering world is the data engineer as not just a technical person, but as a systems builder
and a systems thinker. Some larger organizations have data architects, but this sort of idea that
we have, like, across the whole company, you have information flowing around, and we need to be able
to have a, we want to avoid a situation where, as the company grows, you start having all of these
data silos, and everyone's, like, getting their own sources of truth and, like, creating their
own metrics, and none of the metrics agree. The data engineer is really well-positioned to think
about, like, how does data move throughout the organization? What sort of conventions do we want
to put around publishing data products? What sort of guarantees do we want to make? What kind of
language do we want to use? What compliance patterns do we need to implement to make sure
that our data is being used correctly? So, I think increasingly, I'm going to be thinking
about those sorts of organizational decisions. So, not just the technical, but actually, like,
the human organizational patterns around data access and usage.
Thanks, Steven. I see Tatsu had a question, as well. He said, as a fellow recovering academic,
if you want to jump in, Tatsu. Yeah, sure thing. Hey, Steven. Great to see another
post-PhD doing well in industry. So, actually, it's pretty funny, because my background is
very similar to yours. I think you said you were imaging while you had kids reading,
or something like that. Mine is basically sub-EEG for the imaging medium, and then
we had kids exercising. So, a lot of similarities there. I ended up landing in the customer success
space. I work at RStudio. And, of course, I have a background in using RStudio, and here I am,
right? But, what I found interesting, so far, from, you know, here and there, as you're answering
questions, right, is I'm very curious on your perspective on, you know, that transition and,
like, how easy or hard it is, right? For me, I think it was very difficult. You know, I come
from psychology, which traditionally, kind of, all they teach you to do is become an academic,
right? There isn't a whole lot of help for you as the student who's, you know, considering a career
and, you know, maybe a data-related role, right, which lends really well to the skill set that
you're taught. But, there isn't any course that teaches you how to do that transition. There
isn't a whole lot of networking events that lends well to that. And, at the same time, right, like,
I think that, from the industry side, I think people are starting to recognize that, oh, wow,
like, people that come through the PhD pipeline, they have a lot of what we need. But, the issue
then becomes, right, from our perspective, we don't know how to phrase those skill sets,
right, to be able to apply it in an interview setting or anything like that. So, I just like
to hear your, kind of, thoughts on that. Is it, kind of, a failure of the higher education system,
or is it something more that, you know, industry folks could be doing better to identify?
That's a, that's such a great question, and I do love, like, anyone who's not familiar with the
brain, like, the brain neuroscience community, it's like, there's a whole, like, subfield of
psychology that's just, like, what's your brain look like when you're doing this, and when you're
doing this, and when you're eating candy, and, like, when you're looking at frogs. It's, like, there's
endless, endless opportunities for, for research, and it's really, I mean, it's amazing. I mean,
there's a lot of amazing research and findings from that, but I, you know, I totally, I totally
feel you, and I'm trying, I think my brain is scrambled on it a little bit. How do I say, like,
it's such a, it's almost like a relationship. When you go with a PhD program, you do feel like
it's, it's, it's both, it's not, it's a job, but it's, like, more than a job, too. There's, like, it's
almost like you have a relationship with the field, and you're very invested in the research, and
you're, like, it's, you're being, you're part of the scientific community, and I think one of the
things that's very jarring about leaving a field is you lose that, it's all, you feel like you're
getting divorced, or something like that, like, you're, like, you're severing that relationship,
and you're severing that community, because it is, it is almost two different worlds, and so
I think, for me, I identified pretty early on that I wanted to move out, and that helped me,
because I was able to spend a lot of time talking with people who weren't in the university, and
building relationships, so that when I did transition, when I graduated, I already knew, like,
I knew people who were on the other side, so to speak, and so I didn't, even though I felt lonely,
and I was the first data science hire, and, like, no one knew what a data scientist did, and no one,
like, I also felt like I had a pretty good understanding of business, of, like, this is what
a business, this is what doing data science and business, doing data in a business looks like,
so I think that if anyone's thinking about transitioning, or doing something similar,
I think that's a very, like, talking to people, and building relationships before that transition
can really help make it softer, but, like, you wish you could have some help, right?
I had a very similar experience, like, when you go through a PhD program, they teach you
how to learn, right? We know how to learn how to learn, and we can learn how to, you know,
figure out this whole getting hired in an industry role sort of thing, and that's exactly what we do,
right? But, yeah, it would have been nicer, right, if you didn't, you weren't the one that
had to actively do all of this networking necessarily, right? It would have been nicer
if there was just kind of some easier formats for you to kind of plug yourself in. Yeah, I had an
interview, you know, one of the things that kind of surprised me is I was this biomedical imaging
PhD at Vanderbilt in Nashville, and Nashville is, like, a huge healthcare hub, and I couldn't find a
job. I, like, it looked for quite a while, and I couldn't find a job, and I met skepticism. I met,
I had one interview where they're kind of like, you sound great, but why would you want to work here?
And then I had another job that was like, well, we don't really do any imaging stuff, and, you know,
I was kind of like, I'm like, I don't, I, it's about the learning, it's about the impact, it's
about, like, it's not about the imaging, you know, it's just one example. This is just one subset of
problems that I'm interested in, and so you do, you do have to go through, like, and intentionally
think about branding yourself and think about, like, I think the biggest thing in industry is
you can't get, you can't get obsessed with the problem. You can't fall, you can't fall in love
with a problem. It's much, it makes your job of finding a job and, like, fitting in much harder.
You have to fall in love with the, your position in some way, like, like, your,
your, the way, like, how you're solving problems, more of, like, applying the mindset of a scientist
into this business context. I think, whereas on the other side, like, in academia, you just fall
in love with a problem and you kind of, like, figure out the methods, you know, to, that makes
sense and how to get money and all that stuff. So, it is, I'd say that's the biggest thing,
you know, it kind of goes back to that domain question that we talked about earlier, where it's,
like, if you love healthcare, yeah, if you fall in love with a particular problem in healthcare,
it's harder to pursue that problem across companies because there's, there's much fewer
problem, fewer companies who are looking to hire for that one problem. Yeah.
Sounds like this question hits home for a bunch of people in the chat, too, so maybe there's people
who are willing to talk to others who are going through the same thing, but I see, Sep, you were
also sharing a few tips in the chat, too, if you'd want to say those, too. Yeah, I mean, I haven't
spoken to a PhD where, you know, things like this don't resonate, right, and I've certainly struggled
through that myself. It does, you, everyone carves their own path, I think, as Tatsu was saying,
you just kind of, you learn to learn, you kind of figure it out, and I think that the skill sets
that everyone's learning in graduate school, no matter what the subject area is, are very helpful
in being able to help address that, but, you know, my biggest thing, my biggest advice would be don't
be afraid to reach out to people. Most people are very willing to, to talk to you about what their
journey was, no matter where they're at in, in their career, whether they have a PhD, whether
they don't have a PhD, and once you kind of see that and you start to talk to people, you realize
that your, your, your room is much bigger, right? There's, there's a lot of people from all walks
of life that have moved multiple careers or multiple industries, and so, you know, finding
that through, whether that's your local community, whether it's the data science hangout, whether it's
something else, I think that's the number one thing, and then, and then you feel like, you know,
find the right people. It is pretty amazing, the networking that can be done virtually,
or just on LinkedIn, as well. Like, sometimes I forget, like, oh, I, I met these people on
LinkedIn first, like, in my head, I feel like I know them so well, like we had met in person
at some point. Meredith, I see you also had a question in the chat. Would you want to
jump in with that one? Sure, I know we're almost out of time, but I was just
thinking about what the limitations are between higher education and industry collaborating more.
You know, I've, I've seen some really great collaborations, especially, it seems like,
certain departments within any university do a really nice job connecting with industry and
the community, but it's, I don't know if it's discipline specific, or I'm curious to hear what
people's thoughts are about the limitations of collaboration.
I think my experience at Vanderbilt, I saw a lot more industry collaborations on the engineering
disciplines than I did in, like, psychology, for example, or education, I saw quite a few
collaborations with, like, public institutions. So, you know, whether, I know at Vanderbilt,
they had, like, these big, big surveys and big studies that the university would do in partnership
with the state department of education policy and analysis and that type of stuff, and then in the
biomedical engineering program, it seemed like there were a lot of grants, you know, a lot of,
a lot of work was stemmed by grants that they would get from industry partners, and in fact, like,
I think Google invested a bunch of money into one of the labs we worked with at Vanderbilt. So,
it's a great question, though. I think more is better, for sure, just from a training and
opportunity perspective. Steven, I know we're a little bit over, there's, I think, two more
questions, if that's okay, or do you have to run? Nope, that's fine. Okay, awesome. This is awesome.
By the way, this is, like, the best, this is the best Zoom thing I've been a part of in probably
the last year. This is awesome, like, this, this hanging. Thank you. Thank you all for making it
what it is. Ethan, I see you had another question a bit earlier in the chat, and I can't find it,
so I'm going to pull you, pull you in to ask that.
Sorry. Yeah, I just want to ask, because you've worked with both data engineers and data scientists,
what are the things that, what is your, first of all, what is your point of view of data scientists,
and what do you think they should do more, and what do you think they should do less? Because
we oftentimes hear these conversations between data engineers and data scientists,
that, you know, the perception of both roles, and what is your peer point of view on that?
Yeah, so I would say for data practitioners in general, and this goes for analysts and scientists,
when I was managing the team at Immuta, one thing I found myself saying to our data scientists a lot
was, like, how can we simplify, like, simplify, simplify, like, things, because in the business
context, and again, we're a smaller company, we weren't building, like, and we weren't building,
like, models, right, that had to, like, accommodate a bunch of stuff. We were building more of just
data products, and dashboards, and scores, and things like that for our business consumers. But
having the, you can't, I can't overstate the value of having transparent logic for end users.
And we talk a lot about, like, you hear about explainability in the context of, like, neural
networks, but the same is true for anything, like, any function that, like, takes input data, and
then, like, outputs something, the more explainable that is, the more likely it's going to be adopted
and by the business user. And so, like, if you can get the same, if you can get the same output
from logarithmic regression that you can from, like, some Bayesian model, like, go with logarithmic
regression. So that's kind of cliche, I think, at this point, but I've seen it in practice, and it
has a big effect. The other thing I would say is just always thinking with an eye to deployment,
like, you know, can we do this, what's the simplest way we can do this, and so that we can
get it in production as quickly as possible. So can we do this as a SQL statement? Like,
that was a lot of times the decision that we had to make on the Immuta team, like, can this be a
SQL statement that produces a table that can be read in, or does it need to be some Python, like,
lambda function that runs on a schedule? Because that additional complexity is,
it compounds as the system grows. So the more you can kind of keep things simple, the best, the
better. Yeah, reminds me of a meme about, like, data science and then being unmasked is actually
just if-else underneath. Exactly, yep. And I would say always do the if-else if you can.
You can still call yourself data scientist. I mean, they do it in science too, right? Like,
you never want to look at an actual, like, professor's code. Just read the paper,
get the insights. Don't worry about what's underneath. Yeah, but to be fair,
the XGBoost is also just fancy if-else. Yeah, that's true.
Olivier, I see you also had a comment around building trust in data,
lightly processed data. Do you want to jump in and add any context to that?
Sure. So that's kind of part of my job right now. I'm doing, like, data engineering by proxy,
working on data integration, and it's very, very complicated. But that's part of my challenge is
making sure that we can build trust in our data and our lightly processed data and our
consumable data. And, you know, doing that is all new to me. Change data capture and business
rule externalization. Can you talk anything about that? Yeah, so one of the light bulb moments for
me was at leading the data team at Immuta and, like, starting to grow the system was
reading a book called Data Management at Scale. It's very, like, theoretical, but one of the
principles is this idea of domain-driven design, which is as data comes in to your system,
you don't want to build just, like, a big black box where it's, like, again, it's kind of
explainability, right? So when data comes in from, you know, the marketing team and the sales team
and the customer success team, you don't want to just, like, merge it into one, like, super, super,
super table and then, like, expose it. You want to try and set up, like, interfaces where it's,
like, all right, here's the lightly processed marketing data. Here's the lightly processed
sales data. Here's the lightly processed customer success data and kind of keep some,
keep some, you want to track the lineage, right? So that you know, like, hey, this is coming from
here. And then if someone from marketing or sales or product comes in, they don't have to ask, like,
where does this come from? Like, where's this marketing, you know, I'm looking at sales data,
but I'm getting all this extra marketing data with it. What I found is that
the more you can do that, the more people can, like, feel, feel ownership over it. I, we did
this one thing at Immuta where we exposed Salesforce, which is our customer relationship
management platform. It has, like, all of our customer lists and stuff in it. Salesforce data
comes into the warehouse, then it gets exposed in our BI tool Looker. And there was this weird
thing where the person who managed Salesforce would look at numbers in Looker and they would be,
like, I don't know what these are. Like, they wouldn't, they didn't feel ownership over it
simply because it was, like, going through our pipes. And so we re-architected things and
tried to keep it much more, like, domain oriented. And they, that had the positive effect of, like,
making them feel more ownership over it. Because they would go and they'd look at Looker and they'd
look at Salesforce and be like, okay, this matches up. Like, and they kind of go and do that.
And that sort of building trust and building familiarity with the data is really hard.
But I think it's easier if you can keep things separate and lightly processed and just have
good documentation and clarity. But it's a challenge. I think it's probably one of the
biggest challenges in data management. Thank you so much.
Thank you so much, Stephen, for jumping on and sharing your experience with us. And thank you
all for asking all these amazing questions, too. I just wanted to see, Stephen, what's the best way
to get in touch with you if people have follow-up questions or want to connect? Is it LinkedIn?
Yeah, LinkedIn is good. I have a Twitter account. I try, Twitter kind of scares me and I don't want
to get sucked in. So I don't post on that too much. But LinkedIn is good. I started writing
more this year. And so feel free to subscribe to that. But yeah, I really appreciate all the
time, everybody. This is awesome. Thank you so much. And if you want to continue any of the
conversations from today, I'll put the LinkedIn group in the chat, too. And feel free to start
your own discussions there. I usually share a few of the helpful links there, too. Thanks all.
Have a great rest of the day.